The course webpage can be found at

  <http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/matthias/7480-s17/index.html>

(Unless noted otherwise, it is Matthias speaking)

At Rice I met a chairman coming from the maths department that taught
me a lot about how to develop and pursue ideas. Some people have
incredible ideas but only write one, or a couple, papers about it, and
the ideas may not go anywhere.

In the case of linear programming, it was an incredible idea but
initially was blocked by the limitation of computers at the time. [The
author](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Dantzig) kept pushing for it, and
eventually the hardware became good enough and it exploded in popularity.

This course is not about history. What I want you to discover is that

  research is a web of themes

You typically go to a grad seminar and present *a* paper and its
idea. Where did it come from?

But there are other questions, what motivated the paper? Is there
a problem that existed in the real world, and you wrote the paper to
solve the paper? That's the best case. But maybe there is a stream of
papers that came before this paper; then you need to recognize what is
the delta, the increment in the paper. This it the thing that you need
to be able to tease out. Ideally you can then find ideas of your own
where you can push ahead, and more papers come out. A *theme* is one of
those threads of research.

(1) You present a series of deltas.

I call this course "History" of programming languages because you need
to learn that there is a history of papers, not present only one paper
by itself.

This course is intended for people who want to do research and want to
produce something researchy. Maybe you have a thesis to write
(master thesis, phd thesis). Anyone is of course welcome to freeload.

(2) You present a range of ideas.

Some people think PL is about proofs. Some people think it's about
garbage collection (GC) performance tables. Some of you realize that
you need categories to really really understand all these programming
languages. It's a common misconception to focus on your one island
rock of idea. PL is the oldest discipline of computer science, it
started in 1927, and you should all know that it does not rest on any
single one of these ideas, but on all of them.

Of course if you are a category terrorist you don't need to know
everything about GC. But you need to know about

(3) A repository of themes.

I don't teach this course very often, and cool things happen each
time. Last time one of my student, Carl Eastlund, ended up working in
the industry on exactly one of the topics presented by someone else
from the course, and he knew exactly where to look because of that.

If you are a senior student, this is a good occasion to pick some
bibliographic research that you have done already, or should be doing
anyway. If you are junior student, you get to know something that
interests you.

(a) For January 13 I want you to have 3-5 ideas for a first theme. Let
me explain you what is a theme and what is not a theme.

"I would like to do types": types is not a theme, it is a horror
monster, a humongous pile of stuff.

"Gradual typing" is not a theme anymore, it has blown out of
proportions. Sam Tobin-Hochstadt has been collecting papers, he
stopped three years ago and already has 70-80 papers
[(link)](https://github.com/samth/gradual-typing-bib). If you go over 100
publications, it's not a theme.

You might have "how contracts play a role in macro-level gradual
typing". That's a decent theme: it's about 10 papers, you don't know
them all but you can find them.

Max: do you want themes as they were conceived as the research was
happening, or something we seen in retrospect?

Matthias: if you are old enough to have a perspective, you should
present it. I expect most people will actually create a perspective.

If you are unsure whether it's a theme, try to write it on a piece of
paper somewhere. If you have 50, it's too big, if you have 2 it's too
small.

Some of you will pick the same thing. Priority goes to seniority, it's
like a union here. You showed up at the first meeting, so you will
also get priority. In any case I'll get back to you with one or two
proposal from your list.

After we get the theme back from me, at some other time that you can
find on the schedule that is on the webpage
( http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/matthias/7480-s17/index.html ), you will
do:

(b) You should have a list of about 10 papers. Maybe in chronological
order, but sometimes it's more complicated.

I will be heavily relying on my colleagues to complement me on topics
I am not expert in.

The people who will get the most out of these courses are the people
that will present. I have 32 slots, that is in fact not enough slots
for everyone. Priority to people that are signed up; if you are not
enrolled, come talk to me and let me know if you want to present.

Friday morning I will come with an example of theme, a very
theoretical theme for the heck of it. In the following weeks you will
have example of theme presentations from senior researchers.

