# Title: Refactoring
## Speaker : Frank Tip

refactoring is applying some change that doesn't affect the program's behavior

useful for programmers, don't need to worry about writing the most general or
extensible code at the start, can just write correct code and refactor later


### Beginnings

#### Griswold's dissertation, 1991

- specified refactorings in terms of program dependence graphs (PDGs)
- had a large catalog of transformations
- argued why transformations did not change program behavior
- mapped transformations to source code (Common Lisp or Scheme, I forget)


#### Opdyke's dissertation, 1992

- coined the term 'refactoring'
- created abstract superclasses
- introduced new subclasses
- replaced conditionals with a method hierarchy
- moving / modifying methods and fields
- no serious implementation, but inspired the Smalltalk refactoring browser

> M: we added renaming to DrRacket in 1994, but didn't know it was "refactoring"
>    or interesting
> F: yes it helps to give something a technical name


### Fowler, _Refactoring_

The book. Written for developers. Easy to read.

> M: AHEM
> M: people like Fowler, the gurus, if you have any taste in style and read
>    one page, it's like waterboarding. And I'll leave it to you to decide
>    whether that's torture.
>
>    But I will say, academics write in a way that is completely inaccessible
>    to developers. The gurus fill a very important gap. And they become rich
>    and famous on your work.
> F: yes, yes
> W: you assume that they actually know 'our stuff'
> M: yes (cites personal connection) ... I tried to visit her in Seattle
>    once, just showed up at the door, but she's home approximately 5
>    days out of the year. Extremely busy giving talks etc.

(Later found out that M was very inspired by Fred Brook's writing when
 he was working in industry. While inspired, wrote a paper with a 3-page
 introduction about why developers should want CPS. A colleague crossed
 the intro out and said "focus on the PL not the SE".)

> F: The Eclipse foundation took Fowler's book as a list of the refactorings
>    that people want. And so, this book directly inspired my research.


### How I got started

Working at IBM, they were close with Eclipse, received an email from Adam
Kiezun that said "this extracting interfaces problem is not so trivial"

Extracting interfaces ~ change code that uses a concrete class (ArrayList)
to use an interface (List)

1. pick the class to extract from
2. programmer chooses interface methods
3. declare the interface, declare an "implements" relationship
4. update all uses of the class

Steps 1-3 are VERY EASY. Step 4 is HARD.

> L: is this refactoring actually useful? do people get mileage out of this?
> F: I can say that I got a lot of bug reports while maintaining this software
> M: bug reports mean that you exist

(example code)

> G: you keep mentioning generics, but they didn't exist in Java at the time
> F: right. In a minute though, I will show a refactoring that deals with
>    generics

Often find a "clique" of uses to change .... meaning it's safe to change
all the uses to use the interface, but if any ONE uses the class then they
all must use the class


solution = build set of type constraints

> M: type constraints started in Australia at the same time, Herman and
>    Schaffer 1994, same idea in two places but the Prolog and object
>    communities had nothing in common

> G: why change the class to the interface _within_ the class?
> F: there's just no reason to limit yourself to a subclass, if you don't
>    need the more specific behavior, better to use a superclass. The Java
>    Collections library is a good example.
> M: the class is a self-client. happens all the time

> W: sociology note ... book on type constraints ... Jens visited Northeastern
>    and we talked about the problem

> M: question --- do you ever NOT want the least solution to the type
>    constraints? Isn't that the ideal?
> W: well ANY solution gives a correct refactoring
> M: yes sure, but why compute anything besides the minimal?
> W: maybe the problem is NP hard and it's not practical to get the minimal,
>    but you can overapproximate

Our solution was: search for non-updatable uses to a fixed point, then
update the remaining uses. (Assumes input is a whole program.)

> M: what if there are 2 maximal solutions?
> F: for the model in the paper, there was always only 1 solution.
>    Multiple inheritance would break that invariant
> M: poor C++
> F: yes I think everyone at the time was rather intimidated by C++

> M: Do these algorithms apply in languages related to Java, like C#?
> F: Yes I think it would apply, but I am not sure about the fine details.
>    (Meaning of "private", etc)

> M: could this work in Smalltalk, where there aren't really types and there
>    are first-class classes? (Could conflate classes with types, which is a
>    terrible idea that everyone does.)
> F: the refactoring browser in Smalltalk does a good job. True there's no
>    types, but it inserts dynamic checks when it's not certain.
> W: structural types are another part of the design space
> M: but in practice, computing with structural types is expensive

> L: doesn't Java have first-class classes through reflection?
> F: the analysis doesn't handle reflection
> M: someone ought to solve that problem, these aren't FEXPRs its an interesting
>    middle ground for metaprogramming
> F: would be painful, but may work out


### Adding Generics

Problem: add a generic parameter to a non-generic class that clients
use with type casts. Convert `class Stack` to `class Stack<T>`

> D: weird, you couldn't change `push(pop())` to two statements
>    if the generic parameter is an F-bounded wildcard ... because
>    you don't have a name for the type in between
> M: very interesting! so refactoring cannot A-normalize

evaluation, removed 50% of type casts and 90% of "unchecked" warnings

> M: interesting challenge, what's missing from the type system for the other
>    50% of casts
> F: these were for a variety of uses ... if it was one thing, we'd have
>    attempted something systematic

> J: what's the algorithmic complexity?
> M: need to do transitive closure (its polynomial but bad, like O(n^5) )
> F: but supertype chains are typically short, and you don't need to consider
>    all types.
>    Ran in about 2.5 seconds on 1/4-million LOC
> M: wow that's extremely fast, took us hours on untyped code. Do you cache
>    results by file, or by package?
> F: no

> J: how did the implementation evolve?
> F: we implemented a research prototype, Eclipse re-implemented it,
>    then I spent lots of time performance tuning. Now I've distanced myself.
> G: do you know why Eclipse re-implemented?
> F: they wanted to own the code, wanted to remove a jarfile dependency
> M: how did the transfer from research to development work out?
> F: well I was a researcher at IBM, and IBM had close ties to Eclipse.
>    Basically, I became a developer for some time. That's what you have to do.

> F: also, Adam Kiezun went on to do a PhD at MIT after this project. He
>    decided he liked research.


### Steimann and Thies, _From Public to Private to Absent_, ECOOP 2009

Refactorings before this paper typically ignored public/private/package
modifiers. But in practice, a package boundary is a very important distinction.
Can't just move classes between packages and expect everything will run.

(slides, adapted from the original authors, maybe a bug in one slide)

> W: there's a famous quotation from the Talmud "tell Torah in the name
>    of he who told it". In other words, don't hesitate to give credit or
>    blame!


### Bugs

"This kind of refactoring" (bg: not sure exactly which is 'which') is usually
buggy, makes small problems after you run.

> M: suggests that the bugs "don't bother" programmers, the bugs are easy
>    to fix, the compiler or test suite catches them. So how do you
>    evaluate a refactoring like that?
> F: In general, evaluation is difficult. For adding generics we were able
>    to count removed casts.

> M: has anyone instrumented Eclipse to learn how these refactorings are used,
>    or see the bugs programmers deal with?
> F: some studies on students
> M: doesn't count
> L: all significant users would be companies who would refuse to be tracked


### Schäfer and Ekman and deMoor, _Sound and Extensible Renaming for Java_, OOPSLA 2008

Can't just rename naively, need to care about scopes.

> W: on behalf of all the λ calculus hackers in the room "duh!"

But in this case, we can change `y` to `A.this.y` and do the renaming

> W: ok, interesting!

....

> A: general question, what language features make refactoring hard?
> F: Scala would be difficult, with all the type system features

> S: hmm, when people say "my type system makes refactoring easy" they're really
>    saying "my type system gives me a checklist when I make a change"
>    Based on what you said, these type systems make **automatic** refactoring
>    difficult.

> D: would you say "hard to refactor" correlates to a programming "gotcha"
> F: yes
> J: it's always tricky when there is an inference algorithm involved
>    (type inference, implicits resolution)

> ZN: how many groups prove correctness of their algorithms
> F: Few. My paper on interfaces gave a model language and proof. But since
>    there is no formal specification of Java there's not so much focus on
>    formal proofs.
> M: what ML did for type soundness was prove it for a model. Then in a long
>    technical report listed the challenges (bugs) ... one in particular led
>    them to change the language.
> J: and there was that recent paper on null pointers in Java/Scala. The models
>    didn't talk about null because why bother, but in fact adding null
>    breaks the soundness proofs
> M: there's always 2 options, fix the language or fix the model. PL is so cool

