## Title: No Good Answers, Gradually Typed Object Oriented Languages
### Speaker: Ben Chung

This talk is organized around questions about the design of gradual type systems.

#### Q. Is Gradual Typing equivalent to Soft Typing?

Short answer is "no".

_Inferring Types in Smalltalk_

- run something like Hindley-Milner type inference on a smalltalk program
  (containing type annotations)

Evaluation is ... lacking. Basically "we think it works".

> T: Did they have an implementation?

> B: It's unclear how much they had, and how well it worked
>    Definitely implemented something, but they didn't talk much about it.

Soft typing gives you a magic button to infer types for your program.
Great if it works, but sometimes doesn't and can be very slow.
Flanagan (?) reported something like 10 hours for 40,000 lines.
This is never going to scale to Facebook size.

(bg: Ben is referring to set-based analysis)

> M: Everyone! Why is this comparison nonsense?

> S: Moore's law. Can't compare performance in the 90's with performance today.

> M: Exactly. It's mind-boggling. You can just sit at your desk and things
>    will run faster, e.g. how long it takes to run SLaTeX. Same program now faster.

> B: Fine, but the analysis is still exponential in the size of the program.

> M: Everyone! There is a magic constant that its absolutely crucial you
>    all know, as it governs the kind of impact your research can have on
>    the working programmer. Anyone know? ... it's 10 ... ten lines of code.
>    That's how much code, on average, a professional programmer will write
>    in a day, _regardless of language_. Computers have been improved by Moore's
>    Law. Human's aren't going to improve unless we give them better tools.

> R: Is this a leprechaun?

> M: I got the number from Ken Kennedy, read about it again recently.

(bg: Ryan is referring to [_The Leprechauns of Software Engineering_](https://leanpub.com/leprechauns))

Anyway, soft typing is a magic button.
Gradual typing takes a different approach, no magic button but you can add
types and they will be respected, get the benefits of static typing over time.

> B: sort of what we're stuck with

#### Q. Does Soundness Matter?

Paper on Strongtalk, 1993.

> M: this is a highly selective history

> B: this paper has an implementation, and wound up being quite influential

If I have a smalltalk method, `return 2` is a type error because the default
return type in smalltalk is `self`.

> A: why self?

> T: that's an idiom in smalltalk, if you have a side effect return yourself

Strongtalk is unsound, only a linting check.
No runtime type enforcement.

> A: does smalltalk optimize using the types?

> B: No, it may use them as hints I think but not really.

Unsoudnness is the state-of-the-art in industry.
(bg: also in typed languages, nevermind tho)
Typescript, Dart, Hack, are all industry languages influenced by gradual
typing that don't enforce types at runtime.

> S: what actually is the design of strongtalk?

> B: Typecheck a whole strongtalk module.
>    It's unclear if the system is sound when typechecking self-contained
>    Strongtalk programs. I think not because the paper doesn't talk about it.

Conclusion: yes soundness matters


#### Q. What do types mean?

Easy for base types, `Int` is set of all integers, `String` is set of all strings.

What about functions? There are 2 possibilities:

1. the function type denotes all closures borne of statically type-checked functions
2. the function type denotes all closures that are semantically indistinguishable from well-typed ones

> X: semantic obviously is the correct one ... RIGHT?

> B: It's certainly more lenient, allows more programs.
>    But I like static because it might relieve the performance issues

(bg: but static is extremely limiting; if an untyped closure flows to typed
 code, typed code cannot call it, must treat as black box; this ruins all
 hope for a smooth migration path unless you can afford to type the
 "most core" components first.)


#### Q. Who is responsible for verifying a value has the right type?

Sound gradual typing started with:
- Tobin-Hochstadt, Felleisen. _Interlanguage Migration_, DLS'06
- Siek, Taha. _Gradual Typing for Functional Languages_, SFP'06

Both take "semantic interpretation" view of types.

(demo of typed racket, type-preserving-chaperones)

(demo of Reticulated)

> X: ahhh! you can't actually reason about your types

> R: types don't serve as an abstraction barrier


#### Q. What performance is acceptable?

We've seen 2 approaches to enforcing type soundness.
One that is morally correct, but oh dear it can be slow.
Other is morally imperfect, but overhead seems much better.

> G: A wise person once said to me, if you take a barrel of wine and add
>    an ounce of sewage, you get sewage.


#### Demo of `C#`

`τ ~ Dynamic` is not true in interfaces, but is true in method bodies,
really `Dynamic` is similar to `Object` with some implicit casts.

Moral of the demo is, if you start adding types to a `C#` class definition you
may need to change many other classes.

> A: do people actaully use dynamics in `C#`

> B: oh yes, `C#` apps in `ASP.net`, ... JavaScript
>    Usually, to add untyped behavior to typed programs.

