## Title: Type-directed Compilation, Part II (dependent types)
### Speaker: William Bowman

Look out for 4 things today:

1. type preservation
2. dependent types
3. correctness
4. auditability

### _The design and implementation of a certifying compiler_, George Necula and Peter Lee, PLDI 1998

compile a subset of C, produce assembly and a certificate
(esier to check proof than verify the compiler)

> J: it's not typed assembly, right?

> WB: right, normal assembly with annotations and a spec

> A: what are the types? (WB: 1 sec)

the trusted computing base (TCB) is:

- the verification condition generator
- the solver
- the proof checker

The compiler doesn't say what type and memory safety means,
the verification-condition generator does that from the _type spec_ and
_annotated assembly_.

> C: what's certified? ASM relates to C or ASM has no errors?

> WB: yes

> J: so compiler can produce anything?

> WB: yes yes


> ?: auditability! Peter Lee in Paris said he wanted programmers to be able
>    to read and critique the verification conditions

if given a well-typed C program, the compiler will yield a type-annotated
assembly program that the certifier may-or-may-not find a counterexample for

The source language includes:

- array(α, Natural)
- boolean
- java-style exceptions
- heap allocation

The source language excludes:

- function pointers
- `&`
- casts
- pointer arithmetic
- free

> T: why are function pointers bad?

> M: where do the free variables in a function come from?

> L: if all functions are first order, the only free variables are globals
>    in the compilation unit


> L: is 'length' a primitive operation?

> M: the C people told me, keep a table mapping addresses to array lengths

loop invariants: `AnnInv(predicate, {x ...})` where the `x` are live registers

type specs: pre and post conditions written in first-order logic

> D: are lopos first class?

> WB: No, loops are implemented with labeled blocks. The annotations are what
>     distinguish function jumps from loop jumps


> M: is that "forall" for values?

> WB: no, for registers

> M: you mean, any value that can go in a register?

> WB: yes


> A: (possible issue in type rule)

> WB: the paper does not prove soundness of the type rules

> A: Aha! Well everyone, this is "proof carrying code" (PCC) as opposed to
>    "foundational proof carrying code" (FPCC) which sought the smallest TCB
>    in order to catch these kinds of errors


> M: has someone proved a 'remove array bounds check' optimization in this kind
>    of system?

> WB: next paper


> A: what does proof checker provide?

> WB: compiler produces a predicate, that's what the proof checker checks

> M: that's 'auditability', the programmer checks, they use this to plug in to
>    their operating system and the OS just checks it correct and lets it run
>    wild. Client needs to inspect the spec!


> R: sounds like this paper doesn't satisfy the underlying goal . . . do they
>    present a rational design, in your mind?

> WB: it's a first step

The verifier is LF


### _A Dependently Typed Assembly Language_, Hongwei Xi and Robert Harper, ICFP 2001

Rather say "index typed" assembly, since the only type whose values you can
depend on is the integers.

> X: that's still dependently typed

- goal: dynamically allocate arrays, eliminate bounds checks
- support certification just using a type system, no other logic or verifier
- issue: how to type control flow in assembly?



> M: if you look at this, it's a register machine. Need CPS to compile to it.

How to CPS with dependent types? Our 3rd paper shows its not possible with full
dependent types.

> M: I don't care, I want to compile 'indexed types'

> WB: That's the 5th paper, _Type-preserving Compilation of End-to-end
>     Verification of Security Enforcement_

> M: what's their source language?

> WB: "Fine", a predecessor to `F*`


> A: call-by-name (CBN) vs call-by-value (CBV) ... application is not type
>    preserving in CBN and pairs are not type preserving in CBV

(that is, "compilation of pairs")

> M: if I don't care about dependent types, what's the problem? Normal language
>    to ITAL

> WB: yeah you can probably do that

> C: so a negative result is that you cannot compile C to a dependently typed
>    language, and from there to ITAL


> R: ... 2015 paper ... 

> A: doesn't handle CPS

> BC: ... CIL is basically Java bytecode

> J: the .NET intermediate representation contains some types, Java does not

- - -

Certifying compilation is hard, but not impossible.
Its an open question what to do about dependent types.

> M: vast majority of programmers do not use full-spectrum dependent types,
>    I see this gap ... I want to see a verified compiler for ML ... what
>    does CakeML do? Is it type preserving?

> WB: I don't think so

(no, it's semantics preserving but not type preserving)

> M: maybe instead of type preservation, what we really care about is some
>    kind of auditing


