# Title: Logical Relations: Stepping Beyond Toy Languages
## Speaker: Amal Ahmed

### Termination of STLC

#### Motivation

If you attempt to prove that *all closed, simply-typed λ calculus terms terminate*, you will fail.
You fail at the proof that `((λx.e1) e2)` terminates, because `e1` is an open term.
The induction hypothesis is not strong enough.

#### Solution

The logical relations solution is to define a unary predicate `N` indexed by types.

-  `N_bool(e)` iff `⊢ e : bool` and evaluating `e` terminates
- `N_{τ_1→τ_2}(e)` iff `⊢ e : τ_1 → τ2` and evaluating `e` terminates and `∀e' . N_{τ_1}(e')` implies `N_{τ_2}(e e')`

In general, terms `e` in a type-indexed logical relation `N` (written `N_τ(e)` or `e ∈ N_τ`):
- are well-typed at `τ`
- have the "property of interest" (like termination)
- preserve the property through elimination forms (like application)

Given `N_τ` there are 2 parts to proving strong normalization:

1. Show that `⊢ e : τ` implies `N_τ(e)`
2. Show that `N_τ(e)` implies `e` is normalizing

Proving 2 is easy by definition --- we set up the logical relation to make it easy to prove!

### Proof-Carrying Code

Amal started doing logical relations while working on the "foundational proof
carrying code" project at Princeton. Paraphrasing her words:

> We could have used Twelf as a prover, but we decided it was too big to trust.
> "Need to have a small trusted computing base!". That was Andrew Appel's motto.
> So the idea was to consider types as sets and prove properties.
> Doing so, I wound up re-inventing logical relations.


> J: whatever happened to PCC/FPCC?
> A: we finished FPCC ... built an ML, proved sound. Then the project dried up.
> J: what about the idea of PCC?
> A: well the idea was you can ask for any property and just prove it, but who
>    will generate these proofs
> M: also the size blowup of carrying proofs
> J: gzip?

> A: okay one thing you can do is build a type-preserving compiler, then
>    you have the proofs from types and can propagate.
>    Can't do much more without programmer annotations.
>    In the end, FPCC couldn't do more than type safety.

### Type Soundness via Logical Relations

The path is:

1. Show that `⊢ e : τ` implies `⊨ e : τ`
2. Show that `⊨ e : τ` implies something good about `e`

Where `⊢` is the type system and `⊨` is a logical relation that describes what's
"true" about `e`


### Recursive Types

> W: I love the smell of recursion in the morning

Logical relations for termination and type soundness are nice.
But they do not scale to recursive types ... once you add a recursive type
then your type-indexed logical relation is no longer well-founded.

Idea (Appel McAllester):
- index the logical relation with a natural number and a type, `(ℕ × τ)`
- decrement the number each time you apply the "circular" rule for recursive types
- well-founded by lexicographic induction on `(N × τ)`
- prove your property holds for any index value

Amal's dissertation showed how to handle ML-style references using the techinque.
Key point: need to stratify the universe of types.

> X: note, this technique works for safety properties, but not liveness properties.
>    (you can show "no bad" but not "yes good")

### Looking back

- earliest reference to the idea is Tait 1967
- Plotkin 1973 uses the word "logical relation"
- something Andy Pitts ... and Pitts later gave "logical relations with
  recursive types" as an exercise in ATTAPL ... with an off-the-charts
  difficulty rating. This is culturally significant because it inspired Amal.

parametricity
- Girard 1973
- Reynolds 1983 (∀)
- Mitchell 1986 (∃)

- Birkedal Harper 1999
- Crary Harper 2007

- Bob Harpers early work on logical relations
- influenced David Walker
- which influenced Amal's 2004 paper

The term "step index" is from Greg Morrisett.
> All logical relations are indexed by types. This one is step indexed.

- Ahmed 2006 : binary relation with recursive types
- Ahmed Dreyer Rossberg 2009 : binary relation with references
