## Title: Functional Reactive Programming
### Speaker: Sam Caldwell

> Alan Perlis: a language is low-level when it forces you to focus on the irrelevant

FRP is what a high-level language for . . . would look like


### _Functional reactive animation_, Conal Elliott and Paul Hudak, ICFP 1997

(for any type `a`), a **behavior a** is a time-indexed value

> M: is it a function?

> SC: yes that's a good intuition, but it's a trainwreck to build the system that way

> X: for the programmer or the implementor?

> SC: both, I mean if you can't implement it

> X: might be a good programming model, but hard to implement

> SC: ok, right

"time-indexed values" go back to the 80s/90s with
[Kavi Arya](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=99370.99409),
who programmed with "animations" as "lists of pictures".

streams (infinite lists) represent infinite animations

> M: did he publish?

> SC: yes, at SIGGRAPH (?), JFP

haven't defined time yet ... Elliott and Hudak chose continuous time, because:

- humans perceive time continuously
- want temporal resolution independence --- you can scale an animation with
  respect to type, like a vector graphic at different space sizes

> M: I did discrete time in big-bang, and it doesn't scale! David Van Horn
>    uses big bang to demonstrate soft contract verification and he needs to
>    pre-record the programs and replay at a different speed


> T: today, I think Conal is a bit upset that people are "discrete-izing"
>    the notion of time in FRP


> L: did they implement functional reactive animation?

> SC: yes

> M: you can do continuous time with computable reals, it's easy for some value
>    of easy

> C: can get pretty far with just rationals

> SC: they used doubles

a "behavior Image" is a time-varying image, a simple animation
a behavior has value at all times,

an **event** is defined only at some times (for all types `a`, can define
`event a`)

> L: why doesn't an event come with a time, in the definition?

> SC: useful to specify what an event is, e.g. "left button pressed",
>     independent of an instance of that event (which needs a time)

... semantics ...

> M: let me pick on something on the board --- those are Quine quotes,
>    nobody except denotational semanticists have any business using Quine
>    quotes, so is this Haskell specified with denotational semantics?

> SC: yes

for programming with events, have notion of "partial time" such as
`t<=5` which means "after time 5"

> M: really `<=`? Not a strict inequality

> SC: really, that's whats in the paper


> M: denotational semantics and continuous time don't fit together at this point

> X: continuous time, not continuous functions on time


> R: stepping back, this all makes sense with an oracle that knows at what time
>    in the future everything happened . . . how do we turn this into a real
>    system?

> SC: we will see, but it's basically an open problem

new function, `untilB : behavior a -> event (behavior a) -> behavior a`

when the event occurs, switches from the given behavior to the behavior in the
event

> B: gotta be the same `a`

> SC: yes


> R: how can you guarantee future events don't influence the past?

> S: I think the right answer is "isn't it cool that we can express that?!"

> M: there is a Yale tech report by Hudak comparing 3 models of IO,
>    they wouldn't mind being omniscient


a `timeTransform : behavior a -> behavior time -> behavior a` scales an event

> R: so I can pass in a scale that makes the behavior run backwards?

> ?: yes

> M: maybe, this FRP is limited by the Haskell type system, and they would
>    be better with a different system

(Neel Krishnaswami is working on that, I think)

> M: can't believe how often they use equality

> SC: later work used time intervals

> M: is this work inspired by electrical engineering (EE)? rising edges?

> SC: sort of, they point to Astral which points to EE


### _Functional implementations of continuous modeled animation_, Conal Elliott, PDP 2006

function `integral : behavior real -> behavior real` starts at beginning, stops at now

> M: in big-bang I have also wanted differentiation

> SC: nope, not addressed in this work

> X/A: what do you need differentiation for?

> M: have events, want to compute backwards

. . . time complexity of a sample grows exponentially as events occur

. . . spacetime leak . . . Neel Krishnaswami is definitely working on that

> FZN: I remember a nice demo by Paul Hudak, showing an animation of Simon
>      Peyton Jones and Phil Wadler talking ... and after awhile they would
>      pause, because the garbage collector was running

**Residual Behaviors** ... if you sample a behavior at a given time, you get
both a result and a new behaviors --- which assumes it will only be called
with later times

> SC: FRAN uses stampls, pointer equality on cache keys


What to do?

Lets change the model, get a more reasonable implementation

"Arrowed FRP" of Courtney and Elliott. TLDR; stream processors

> A: in this description of arrows and programs defined by arrows, where is time?

> SC: time is "low level", just need something well founded


> R: do all arrows limit lookahead?

> SC: yes, if you pull 1 input you need to push 1 before pulling again

Takeaways:

- restrictive model, hard to recover behaviors at runtime, is current / future
  work, no good answers yet

> FZN: FRP good for some areas ... fly-by-wire don't care about synchronization
>      details, just want real time and space bounds


### _Embedding dynamic dataflow in a call-by-value language_, Gregory H Cooper and Shriram Krishnamurthi, ESOP 2006

> BLC: can you dynamically reconfigure these programs?

> SC: yes, and that's definitely the hardest part of the semantics ... no
>     theorem arguing they got it right


- - -

> M: the _Functional Reactive Animation_ paper came out in 1997, and conferences
>    back then sometimes accepted papers where maybe serious details are missing,
>    but its a really cool idea and might inspire other work.
