## Title: Categorical Semantics of Untyped Languages
### Speaker: Max New

Key papers:

- _Adjointness in Foundations_, Lawvere, 1967
- Lambek, 1968 1969 1972 (Deduction systems in categories)
- Scott, 1969 (PCF)
- Scott, 1972 D∞
- Scott, 1974 Pω
- _T^ω as a Universal Domain_, Plotkin, 1978
- _Relating Theories of λ Calculi_, Scott, 1978
- _From λ calculus to cartesian closed categories_, Lambek, 1978
- Lambek & Scott 1986

CCC = cartesian closed category

Key theorem 1: every CCC is a model of the corresponding typed λ calculus

This is nice, but maybe CCCs have extra things that you don't need in a model.
Not so!

Key theorem 2: a CCC is no more than a model of a λ calculus

> M: none of these guys appeal to the theorems just yet (at this point in time)

> M: people tried to reduce λ to S,K combinators
>    didn't realize you can divide the proof effort into the 7 steps to have
>    for CCC's. That's the big contribution from category theory. Comparable
>    to the jump from working in assembly to a higher-order language.


> M: no fixpoints yet

> X: can add them to your calculus, but right they have no interpretation

Example CCCs:

- category of sets
- syntax of λ calculus
- continuous lattices & functions over them


### 1969, Scott

In 1969 Scott announces "there are no models for untyped λ calculus",
later that year, he builds a model.

> X: funny to say "untyped λ calculus" because back then it was just "THE λ calculus"

> M: (I think) typed came 15 years later, after WWII. Church also used
>    higher-order abstract syntax (HOAS), though didn't call it HOAS

_Dynamically Typed_ λ calculus will not have η laws (untyped will)
intuition: an η law says "everything is a function", and that won't be true

> M: people had this distinction back then, there was λβ λβη λβηδ λI
>    in λI functions may not ignore their argument (e.g. `((λxy.x)(λz.z)Ω)`
>    not allowed) this appealed more to mathematicians. Doesn't make sense
>    to them for a function to ignore its arguments ... they call it "dummy variables"
>    ... really struggle with the concept

Model for untyped λ calculus is a CCC with a special object --- a _reflexive object_

Translation `C` from untyped terms to typed terms (`D` is the dynamic type)

```
  ----------- Var
  C x = x : D

  C t = t+ : D        λx.t+ : D -> D
  ---------------------------------- Lambda
  C λx.t = e(λx.t+) : D

  C t0 = t0+ : D        C t1 = t1+ : D
  ------------------------------------ App
  C t0 t1 = p(t0+) t1+ : D
```

Used helper functions `e` (embedding) and `p` (projection):

```
e : (D -> D) -> D

p : D -> (D -> D)
```

> M: Wow. Just to show how much Max is watering this down for you all,
>    in the original papers you would see notation like:
>      `C[λx.t]p = .\\x:D.C⟦t⟧ φx/x`
>    and you had to notice the λ with the double-line and the Quine quotes
>    meant the term had completely new meaning

Claim: `t =β u` implies `C t =βη C u`

> M: Reynolds would always clarify this terminology ... retract ... retraction

> X: completely agree, frustratingly similar-sounding words with very different
>    meaning

in untyped model, will have `D` isomorphic to `D -> D`

in dynamically typed, will have `D ▸ D -> D`
a.k.a "there is a retraction from `D` to `D -> D`

> M: that equation for the untyped world is frightening to mathematicians.
>    It can't possibly be right, there's only one model isomorphic to its
>    function space and that's the empty model.

> X: right, this is why Scott calls `Y` the "paradoxical combinator"

> M: in the 50's they understood the problem, but couldn't solve it
>    Scott's genius was to realize `->` had to change. Couldn't be normal
>    function arrow, to restrict the size of `D -> D`

> X: right, `D ~= D -> D` is "obviously wrong" because of Cantor's paradox.
>    But we want to interpret λ terms as functions ... so `D -> D` is not all
>    functions, just a "function space" object ... just the continuous functions
>    to learn finite input about an output object, can poll only finite info
>    about inputs

> X: funny thing, Dana Scott didn't get the Turing award for this. He got it
>    pretty early in life, for nondeterministic automata.

`D∞` isomorphic to `D∞ -> D∞` isomorphic to any tree with `->` nodes and `D∞` leaves
Scott describes this with a fixpoint:

```
D0 = {⊥}
Di+1 = (Di -> Di)_⊥
```

(`_⊥` means "lifted to include `⊥`)

> M: know about fixpoints on syntax at this point, thanks to Banach Knaster
>    Tarski. The trouble is, need a function that constructs the space. That's
>    what Scott figured out.

> X: models of recursive types is hard

issue: covariance and contravariance in `->` ... easy to take fixpoint for
purely-covariant or purely-contravariant constructors. Hard to go both ways

```
  e0 ∙ = λx.x

  p0 ∙ = ∙

  ei+1 (f : Di -> Di, x : Di+1) = ei(f(pi(x)))

  pi+1 ???
```

> A: so `D∞` led to step indexed models ... idea of cutting off

> X: let me show you how ugly this space is

> M: I experienced `D∞` in my youth many times, took so long to get it.
>    Please show me an example member of this domain!

an `x ∈ D∞` is a member of each `Di` ... so can think of a sequence of elements,
one in `D0` one in `D1` and so on. We want this sequence to approximate an
element so lets just call it an element.

> M: (Dear A,) you are a syntactification of math

> A: exactly

> X: syntax should have nice theorems

> A: coming soon!

`D∞` is a model of untyped λ. What's a model of dynamically typed λ?
take sum of datatype domains:

```
  D∞+ == N ⊕ D∞+ × D∞+ ⊕ D∞+ → D∞+
```

inverse limit construction, can define a retract `D∞ -> (D∞+ → D∞+)`
projection will diverge on `N` and products

> X: worlds worst contract system, infinite loops when you have a type error

Summary of `D∞`:

- pro: it is a model
- con: gross giant inverse limit construction

(the reflexive object is `D ▸ D -> D`, the object that has a retraction to
 its function space)


### Pω

Another model, P-omega is the space of functions from the natural numbers to
the (ordered) set of booleans

```
  Pω = N -> {⊥ ⊤}
``

> M: think of objects here as infinitely long vectors of ⊥ and ⊤

> K: so its a set ... subsets of N

key fact 1: `Pω ▸ Pω -> Pω` (right side is continuous functions)

> X: should be obvious how this goes

> ?: ha ha ha

> M: if you think about what it means, you've seen similar things ... mapping
>    the natural numbers to even numbers ... both infinite, but no problems
>    the infinities work out.

key fact 2: every continuous lattice with "countable basis" is a retract
`Pω ▸ A`

> X: element of basis is a finite observation, For N it is equality

can describe types by describing all retracts of a domain

idempotents, I give you `e`, `p`,

```
  A --e--> P∘meag --p--> A   # same as identity on A

  Pω --p--> A --e--> Pω --p--> A --e--> Pω  # same as p;e
```

> M: data types as lattices! any function can define a type!
>    all our focus on syntax and a few basic types has lost this ... except
>    in dynamically typed languages where people use it all the time

Now can take fixpoint, reduced recursive types to recursive functions (easy!
beautiful!)

Theorems (by Scott, about idempotents and CCCs): every dynamically typed theory
is a CCC with a reflexive domain

you give me a model of dynamically typed λ and I'll give you a model of a
typed λ calculus with reflexive domains ... translation of typed terms to
dynamically typed

```
  ⟦ x : A ⟧ = idem(A)(x)

  ⟦λx.t⟧ = λx.⟦t⟧

  ⟦t u⟧ = ⟦t⟧ ⟦u⟧
```

```
  idem(1) = λx.⊤

  idem(A -> B) = λfλx.idem(B)(f(idem(A)(x)))

  idem(A x B) = λx.⟨ idem(A)(π1 x) , idem(B)(π2 x) ⟩
```

these are all η expansions, easy to show =η via =β (with idempotence)

> M: Pω is projections, moves from unsafe to safe, at least you get
>    divergence instead of random bits

- - -

> M: the 1974 issue of SIAM was incredible, you have Scott's _Data Types as Lattices_
>    and Hyland showing full abstraction with Boehm trees and Wadsworth giving
>    theoretical foundations to call-by-name ... incredible ... though the full
>    abstraction result was extremely brittle, could not extend with anything
>    ... if you can find this issue on ebay for $1million, buy it
